Being a hospital doctor is a rewarding but demanding role that will suit you if you enjoy caring for others, have good stamina and can work under pressure

As a hospital doctor, you'll examine, diagnose and treat patients who've been referred to the hospital by GPs and other health professionals. You will need to apply your medical knowledge and skills to the diagnosis, prevention and management of disease.

Work is predominantly found in the public sector (NHS) but you can also work in private hospitals. You'll spend a lot of time working on wards and in outpatient clinics.

As well as treating patients, you'll refer them to a range of other healthcare professionals including nurses, radiographers, pharmacists and physiotherapists.

You can choose to work within a number of specialties. Some of the more common areas include:

anaesthetics
emergency medicine
general medicine
general surgery
obstetrics and gynaecology
paediatrics
psychiatry
trauma and orthopaedics.
Responsibilities
Specific tasks depend on your specialty - for instance, what surgeons carry out on a daily basis is completely different to an accident and emergency (A&E) doctor's workload.

Regardless of your speciality, as a hospital doctor you'll need to:

monitor and provide general care to patients on hospital wards and in outpatient clinics
admit patients requiring special care, followed by investigations and treatment
examine and talk to patients to diagnose their medical conditions
carry out specific procedures, e.g. performing operations and specialist investigations
make notes and prepare paperwork, both as a legal record of treatment and for the benefit of other healthcare professionals
work with other doctors as part of a team, either in the same department or within other specialties
liaise with other medical and non-medical staff in the hospital to ensure quality treatment
promote health education
undertake managerial responsibilities such as planning the workload and staffing of the department, especially at more senior levels
teach and supervise junior doctors and medical students
carry out auditing and research.
Salary
Junior doctors in Foundation Year 1 (F1) earn a basic starting salary of £26,614. In Foundation Year 2 (F2) this rises to £30,805.
A doctor in specialist training starts on a basic salary of £36,461 and can progress up to £46,208. Once training is finished, speciality doctors can earn from £37,923 to £70,718.
Consultants earn a basic salary of £76,761 to £103,490 depending on length of service.
As a doctor in training, you'll receive extra pay if you work over 40 hours a week. There's a 37% enhancement for working nights and allowances for weekend and on-call work. Pay in private practice is set on different scales.

Income data from Health Careers. Figures are intended as a guide only.

Working hours
As a hospital doctor you should expect to work very long and unsocial hours, including weekends and nights (usually on a rota basis), although working hours vary according to specialty. Many roles will involve being on-call for certain periods.

Once qualified and experienced, career breaks are usually possible. However, if the break is longer than two years you may need to carry out some retraining on your return.

What to expect
Working conditions vary according to specialty. Settings include wards, consulting rooms, operating theatres, laboratories and special units such as A&E.
A variety of private practice opportunities exist, depending on your experience and specialist knowledge. These positions can provide more flexibility or management of your own hours.
Opportunities exist in most large towns and cities throughout the country.
Working as a locum can provide the opportunity to practise in various locations throughout the UK. It's also possible to travel and work abroad. It may be necessary to move to a different part of the country to get the job you really want.
The work may be demanding, both mentally and physically, with long, unsocial hours. You will be taking responsibility for patients' health and wellbeing.
Balancing work with further study for about five years after graduation is usually needed in order to gain specialist qualifications. Training for some roles may be longer than this.
Travel is occasionally required as part of the working day. If you're on an on-call rota system, you may frequently be absent from home overnight.
Related case studies

Sarah

Consultant cardiologist

Qualifications
To become a hospital doctor, you must complete:

a degree in medicine, recognised by the General Medical Council (GMC)
a two-year foundation programme of general training
specialist training in a chosen area of medicine.
Medical degrees are available at undergraduate level (taking five years to complete) and graduate level, which typically takes four years. The British Medical Association has further information about applying to medical school as a graduate.

Entry into medicine is very competitive and your motivation and commitment are rigorously assessed. You may be required to complete the UK Clinical Aptitude Test (UKCAT) or BioMedical Admissions Test (BMAT). The BMAT has two test dates, which fall in September and October.

Find out how to prepare for the UKCAT, or visit Cambridge Assessment Admissions Training - Preparing for BMAT.

Following your medical degree, you'll need to complete a two-year foundation programme. This includes placements in different specialties and consists of:

Foundation Year 1 (F1): builds upon the knowledge, skills and competences you developed in undergraduate training and allows you to take supervised responsibility of patient care. Once you've satisfactorily completed F1, you'll be recommended for full registration with GMC.
Foundation Year 2 (F2): you'll remain under supervision but will take on increasing responsibility and make management decisions. At the end of this year, you'll get the award of Foundation Achievement of Competence Document (FACD), which allows you to enter into specialty training. More information is available at The Foundation Programme.
Specialist training is a competency-based rotational programme, which focuses on your chosen medical area. Typical specialties include:

acute care (which divides into further specialties)
medicine
paediatrics
psychiatry
surgery.
The training programmes vary considerably according to the specialty. Details of the different programmes can be found at NHS Specialty Training.

Successful completion of this training leads to the award of the Certificate of Completion of Training (CCT), which allows entry to the specialist register held by the GMC.

For details of training in Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales see:

Northern Ireland Medical and Dental Training Agency (NIMDTA)
Scottish Medical Training (SMT)
Specialty Training Wales
Skills
You will need to show:

personal qualities such as commitment to caring for others, resourcefulness and stamina
a willingness to accept responsibility when making decisions on patients
the ability to prioritise a busy workload and work under pressure
motivation and perseverance
the ability to communicate well with people, demonstrating empathy and reflection
teamworking and leadership skills.
Frequently asked questions:

What are the benfits?
