
Police officers uphold law and order through the detection, prevention and investigation of crime.
After qualifying as a police officer, some choose to specialise in a specific branch such as the drug squad or the Criminal Investigation Department (CID).
What does a police officer do? Typical employers | Qualifications and training | Key skills

Duties can include:

interviewing suspected criminals
taking statements
writing crime reports
dealing with paperwork
gathering prosecution evidence
giving evidence in court
fostering good relationships with the public
patrolling areas by foot and car
making and processing arrests
searching suspects
responding to emergencies
offering advice and reassurance to the public
controlling traffic/crowds
keeping the peace/mediating in tense situations
For many, the sense of reward derived from serving the community and preventing crime will outweigh the negatives.

Typical employers of police officers
Local authority-managed police forces
Specialist forces
The Ministry of Defence Police
British Transport Police
Most forces will advertise locally in the regional press so it is worth contacting the force you are interested in joining to see if they are recruiting or see the police recruitment portal online. Vacancies may also be advertised on specialist forces websites, in local and national newspapers and on TARGETjobs.
ADVERTISE HERE

Qualifications and training required
It is possible to become a police officer both with or without a degree, although all entrants must pass standard police initial recruitment tests (fitness, medical and educational). There are no height restrictions or upper age limits for applications.

The requirements for becoming a police officer vary across police forces; some will ask that applicants hold a Certificate in Knowledge of Policing, have acceptable A levels, or have experience in a relevant role. It is recommended to contact your chosen police force in order to find out their eligibility requirements. While previous experience is not always expected, attendance at familiarisation events and involvement in local police work can be advantageous. Visible tattoos, debt problems and certain criminal convictions may prevent entry.

For graduates, the Metropolitan Police offers a Police Now Leadership programme to candidates with a minimum 2.1 in any degree discipline. Applicants for the programme will be expected to undergo fitness checks and will be tested for substance misuse during the application process.

To find out about how to get into this career via a school leaver route (eg an apprenticeship or school leaver programme) see the public sector section of TARGETcareers, our website aimed at school leavers, particularly this article on getting into the police.

Key skills for police officers
Open-mindedness
Resilience
Assertiveness
Maturity
Able to handle responsibility
Able to remain calm in challenging or dangerous situations
Good interpersonal skills
Communication skills
Teamworking skills
Problem solving skills
Negotiating skills
Related job descriptions
Environmental education officer: job description
Waste disposal officer: job description
Health and safety inspector: job description
Museum education officer: job description
Community arts worker: job description
Heritage manager: job description
Town and country planner: job description
Civil Service administrator: job description
Arts administrator: job description
Advice worker: job description
How much i have to work in hours?
