Engineer Job Description
WHAT DO ENGINEERS DO?
All aboard the job train! Engineers work in a variety of fields to analyze, develop and evaluate large-scale, complex systems. This can mean and improve and maintaining current systems or creating brand new projects. Engineers will design and draft blueprints, visit systems in the field and manage projects.

Job examples include

Chemical Engineers
Mechanical Engineers
Civil Engineers
Computer Engineers
Environmental Engineers
HOW MUCH DO ENGINEERS MAKE?
Depending on the field, you can make between $77,000 to over $100,000 per year, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. In 2010, the median pay for civil engineers was $78,160 or $37.58 per hour. For petroleum engineers, the median pay was $114,080 a year, or $54.85 an hour. Biomedical engineers earned a median pay of $39.20 per year or $81,540 a year.

WHAT ARE THE EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS?
Engineers need at least a bachelor's degree in an engineering field or more. In addition, engineers who offer their services to the public must get licensure in all 50 states and Washington, D.C.

JOB SKILLS AND REQUIREMENTS
Creativity: You must be able to think of new systems and new ways to work. You must be able to think creatively and ask the right questions.
Math Skills: You must understand complex mathematical analysis, calculus, and other mathematics for design and troubleshooting.
Mechanical Skills: The ability to understand mechanical concepts and processes easily, as well as use equipment and tools will help you in your profession.
Problem-Solving Skills: Engineers work to develop new solutions to problems. You will need the skills to identify the source of the problem and create and test solutions.
Teamwork: Engineers will be part of a team in developing systems, fixing problems or creating solutions. You will need to work well with others in order to get the job done.
Listening Skills: Listening to workers, teammates and management is crucial to an engineer's job.
Communication Skills: You must be able to communicate your plans, thoughts, and rationale in your job. Good communication skills will help you greatly in accomplishing your job.
Project Management: Large-scale project require the ability to manage time, supplies, personnel and funds.
Frequently asked questions:
What will be the timings for the job?
Ans:Timings will vary depending on the company.
what is salary?
Ans:Average salary of a software engineer is 3 to 5 lakhs.
